
Ecological facilitation or probiosis describes biological interaction
 Categories 

Image:Nursery Log at Schooner Trail.jpg
There are two basic categories of facilitative interactions:

* Mutualism (biology)* Commensalism is an interaction in which one species benefits and the other species is unaffected. Epiphytes (plants growing on other plants usually trees) have a commensal relationship with their host plant because the epiphyte benefits in some way (e.g. by escaping competition with terrestrial plants or by gaining greater access to sunlight) while the host plant is apparently unaffected.

Strict categorization however is not possible for some complex species interactions. For example seed germination and survival in harsh environments is often higher under so-called Nurse log
 Mechanisms 

The beneficial effects of species on one another are realized in various ways including refuge from physical stress predation and competition improved resource availability and transport.

 Refuge from physical stress 

Facilitation may act by reducing the negative impacts of a stressful environment. Large beds of cordgrass buffer wave action thus allowing the establishment and persistence of a community of less disturbance-tolerant annual plant
In general facilitation is more likely to occur in physically stressful environments than in favorable environments where competition may be the most important interaction among species. The rush shaded the soil which decreased evapotranspiration and in turn decreased soil salinity. However at higher elevations where soil salinity was lower marsh elder fitness was decreased in the presence of the rush due to increased competition for resources. Thus the nature of species interactions may shift with environmental conditions. Facilitation has a greater effect on plant interactions under environmental stress than competition.

 Refuge from predation 

Image:Aphids with honeydew and ants.JPG
Another mechanism of facilitation is a reduced risk of being eaten. Nurse plants for example not only reduce abiotic component
 Refuge from competition 

Another potential benefit of facilitation is insulation from competitive interactions. Like the now familiar example of nurse plants in harsh environments nurse logs in a forest are sites of increased seed germination and seedling survival because the raised substrate of a log frees seedlings from competition with plants and mosses on the forest floor. The crab-coral interaction described above is also an example of refuge from competition since the herbivory of crabs on seaweed reduces competition between coral and seaweed.

In most cases facilitation and competition are inversely proportional.

Studies suggest that facilitation events in nature are rare compared to competition events and thus competition is a greater driver for ecological processes.

 Improved resource availability 

Facilitation can increase access to limiting resources such as light water and nutrients for interacting species. For example epiphytic plants often receive more direct sunlight in the canopies of their host plants than they would on the ground.

However the most familiar examples of increased access to resources through facilitation are the mutualistic transfers of nutrients between symbiotic organisms. A symbiosis is a prolonged close association between organisms and some examples of mutualistic symbioses include:

; Gut flora:Associations between a host species and a microorganism; Lichens:Associations between fungi and algae wherein the fungus receives nutrients from the alga and the alga is protected from harsh conditions causing desiccation.
; Corals:Associations between reef-building corals and photosynthetic algae called zooxanthellae wherein the zooxanthellae provide nutrition to the corals in the form of photosynthate in exchange for nitrogen in coral waste products.
; Mycorrhizae:Associations between fungi and plant roots wherein the fungus facilitates nutrient uptake (particularly nitrogen) by the plant in exchange for carbon in the form of sugars from the plant root. There is a parallel example in marine environments of sponges on the roots of mangroves with a relationship analogous to that of mycorrhizae and terrestrial plants.

 Transport 

The movement by animals of items involved in plant reproduction is usually a mutualistic association. Pollinators may increase plant reproductive success by reducing pollen waste increasing biological dispersal
 Community effects 

Although facilitation is often studied at the level of individual species interactions the effects of facilitation are often observable at the scale of the community including impacts to spatial structure biodiversity
 Spatial structure 

Many facilitative interactions directly affect the distribution of species. As discussed above transport of plant propagules by animal dispersers can increase colonization rates of more distant sites which may impact the distribution and population dynamics of the plant species. As a nitrogen-fixing tree mesquite establishes more readily than other species on nutrient-poor soils and following establishment mesquite acts as a nurse plant for seedlings of other species. Thus mesquite facilitates the dynamic spatial shift from grassland to savanna to woodland across the habitat.

 Diversity 

Facilitation affects community diversity (defined in this context as the number of species in the community) by altering competitive interactions. For example intertidal mussels increase total community species diversity by displacing competitive large Sessility (motility)
Facilitation in certain cases has evolutionary outcomes increasing diversity in communities.

Other mechanisms such as resource partitioning and sampling effect act in tandem with facilitation to increase biodiversity (observable evidence in plant communities).

 Invasibility 

Facilitation of non-native species either by native species or other non-native species may increase the invasibility of a community or the ease with which non-native species become established in a community. In an examination of 254 published studies of introduced species 22 of 190 interactions studied between introduced species in the studies were facilitative. It is worth noting that 128 of the 190 examined interactions were predator–prey relationships of a single plant-eating insect reported in a single study which may have overemphasized the importance of negative interactions. Introduced plants are also facilitated by native pollinators Biological dispersal
See also
* Nurse plants
* Symbiosis
* Mutualism (biology)
* Mycorrhizal network

 Notes 


 References 
* Shears N.T.; Babcock R.C. (2007) https://www.doc.govt.nz/globalassets/documents/science-and-technical/sfc280entire.pdf Quantitative description of mainland New Zealands shallow subtidal reef communities Science for Conservation 280. p 126. Published by Department of Conservation New Zealand



