


Biostasis or Cryptobiosis is the ability of an organism to tolerate environmental changes without having to actively adapt to them. Biostasis is found in organisms that live in habitats that likely encounter unfavorable living conditions such as drought freezing temperatures change in pH levels pressure or temperature. Insects undergo a type of dormancy to survive these conditions called diapause. Diapause may be obligatory for these insects to survive. The insect may also be able to undergo change prior to the arrival of the initiating event.

Microorganisms
Biostasis in this context is also synonymous for viable but nonculturable state. In the past when bacteria were no longer growing on culture media it was assumed that they were dead. Now we can understand that there are many instances where bacteria cells may go into biostasis or suspended animation fail to grow on media and on resuscitation are again culturable. VBNC state differs from starvation survival state (where a cell just reduces metabolism significantly). Bacteria cells may enter the VBNC state as a result of some outside stressor such as "starvation incubation outside the temperature range of growth elevated osmotic concentrations (seawater) oxygen concentrations or exposure to white light". Any of these instances could very easily mean death for the bacteria if it was not able to enter this state of dormancy. It has also been observed that in may instances where it was thought that bacteria had been destroyed (pasteurization of milk) and later caused spoilage or harmful effects to consumers because the bacteria had entered the VBNC state.

Effects on cells entering the VBNC state include "dwarfing changes in metabolic activity reduced nutrient transport respiration rates and macromolecular synthesis". Yet biosynthesis continues and shock proteins are made. Most importantly has been observed that ATP levels and generation remain high completely contrary to dying cells which show rapid decreases in generation and retention. Changes to the cell walls of bacteria in the VBNC state have also been observed. In Escherichia coli a large amount of cross-linking was observed in the peptidoglycan. The autolytic capability was also observed to be much higher in VBNC cells than those who were in the growth state.

It is far easier to induce bacteria to the VBNC state and once bacteria cells have entered the VBNC state it is very hard to return them to a culturable state. "They examined nonculturability and resuscitation in Legionella pneumophila and while entry into this state was easily induced by nutrient starvation resuscitation could only be demonstrated following co-incubation of the VBNC cells with the amoeba Acanthamoeba Castellani"

Fungistasis or mycostasis a naturally occurring VBNC (viable but nonculturable) state found in fungi in soil. Watson and Ford defined fungistasis as "when viable fungal propagules which are not subject to endogenous or constitutive dormancy do not germinate in soil at their favorable temperature or moisture conditions or growth of fungal hyphae is retarded or terminated by conditions of the soil environment other than temperature or moisture". Essentially (and mostly observed naturally occurring in soil) several types of fungi have been found to enter the VBNC state resulting from outside stressors (temperature available nutrients oxygen availability etc.) or from no observable stressors at all.

 Current research 
On March 1 2018 the DARPA
On March 20 2018 the Biostasis team held a Webinar which along with a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) solicited five-year research proposals from outside organizations. The full proposals were due on May 22 2018.

 Possible approaches 
In their Web conferencing
 Protein chaperoning 
In molecular biology Chaperone (protein)
 Intracellular crowding 
The crowdedness of cells is a critical aspect of biological systems. Intracellular crowding refers to the fact that protein function and interaction with water is constrained when the interior of the cell is overcrowded.  By introducing these intracellular polymers to a biological system and manipulating the crowdedness of a cell scientists may be able to slow down the rate of biological reactions in the system.

 Tardigrade-disordered proteins 
Tardigrades are Micro-animal
 References 


* Oliver James D. "The viable but nonculturable state in bacteria." The Journal of Microbiology 43.1 (2005): 93-100.
*Fungistasis and general soil biostasis A new synthesis Paolina Garbeva W.H. Gera Holb Aad J. Termorshuizenc George A. Kowalchuka Wietse de Boer
*Watson A.G. Ford E.J. 1972 Soil Fungistasis—a reappraisal. Annual Review of Phytopathology 10 327.

